Translation
===========

:program:`beng-proxy` knows two ways to locate the resource a request
URI points to:

- via an external translation server

- static translation

The latter is only for debugging. The URI path is appended to the
document root (:file:`/var/www` by default). For security (by
obscurity) reasons, :program:`beng-proxy` has no code for generating
directory listings. If the request has a trailing slash,
:program:`beng-proxy` looks for a file named ``index`` or
``index.html`` and serves it. Without the trailing slash,
:program:`beng-proxy` refuses to handle the request.

The translation server should be the default on production servers. It
is a daemon on the same physical machine which does all the
translation work for us. :program:`beng-proxy` connects to a Unix
socket to contact this translation server.

A request may consist of several micro commands. The request is
initialized with the ``BEGIN`` command, which is followed by any
number of commands which provide parameters. After all parameters have
been transferred, the client sends the ``END`` command, and waits for
the server’s response.

The client can send any number of requests over the socket until one
side closes the connection.

Example conversation
--------------------

#. client sends ``BEGIN`` “\\x03”

#. client sends ``REMOTE_HOST`` “192.168.1.77:1234”

#. client sends ``HOST`` “www.example.com”

#. client sends ``URI`` “/foo/index.html”

#. client sends ``END``

#. server sends ``BEGIN`` “\\x01”

#. server sends ``PATH`` “/var/www/foo/index.html”

#. server sends ``CONTENT_TYPE`` “text/html; charset=utf8”

#. server sends ``PROCESS``

#. server sends ``END``

Command packets
---------------

The protocol is binary and uses host byte order. A command packet may
look like this in pseudo C::

   struct beng_proxy_translate_packet {
       uint16_t length;
       uint16_t command;
       char payload[length];
   };

The ``length`` only refers to the payload. The maximum supported payload
size is 65535 bytes.

Most parameters are ASCII strings; in this case, the payload contains
just the raw string, without terminating zero.

Request
-------

- ``BEGIN``: Begins the request. The payload is a 8-bit unsigned
  integer specifying the protocol version. The protocol version
  described here is 3.

- ``END``: Finishes the request.

.. _t-listener_tag:

- ``LISTENER_TAG``: The “tag” of the listener that accepted the
  connection. The can can be specified in the ``–listen`` setting, for
  example: ``–listen TAG=192.168.1.99:80`` (This packet optional and
  is only submitted if requested via ``WANT``, see page )

- ``LOCAL_ADDRESS``: The local socket address the request was received
  on. The payload is a ``struct sockaddr``. (This packet optional and is
  only submitted if requested via ``WANT``, see page )

- ``REMOTE_HOST``: the client’s address or host name and the port
  number (as string) (This packet optional and is only submitted if
  requested via ``WANT``, see page )
- ``HOST``: the ``Host`` HTTP request header
- ``URI``: the raw URI from the HTTP request (without the query string)

- ``QUERY_STRING``: the query string from request URI, without the
  question mark (This packet optional and is only submitted if requested
  via ``WANT``, see page )
- ``SESSION``: a session identifier generated by the translation
  server, see section :ref:`sessions`
- ``PARAM``: a parameter passed by the browser

- ``USER_AGENT``: the ``User-Agent`` request header sent by the client
  (not in the widget registry) (This packet optional and is only
  submitted if requested via ``WANT``, see page )

- ``USER``: the user name currently logged in using ``AUTH``; see page
  (This packet optional and is only submitted if requested via ``WANT``,
  see page )

- ``UA_CLASS``: a classification token of the ``User-Agent`` request
  header sent by the client. See :ref:`uaclass` for more
  information. (This packet optional and is only submitted if
  requested via ``WANT``, see page )

- ``LANGUAGE``: the ``Accept-Language`` request header sent by the
  client (not in the widget registry) (This packet optional and is only
  submitted if requested via ``WANT``, see page )

- ``AUTHORIZATION``: the ``Authorization`` request header sent by the
  client (see RFC 2617)

- ``CONTENT_TYPE_LOOKUP``: Look up the ``Content-Type`` of a file name
  suffix. See :ref:`ctlookup` for a detailed description.

- ``SUFFIX``: The file name suffix without the dot for
  ``CONTENT_TYPE_LOOKUP``. See :ref:`ctlookup` for a detailed
  description.

- ``ERROR_DOCUMENT``: a resource has failed, and the translation
  server is asked to provide the location of the error document. This
  is followed by the packets ``URI`` and ``STATUS``. See :ref:`errdoc`
  for a detailed description.

- ``PROBE_PATH_SUFFIXES``: Result of ``PROBE_PATH_SUFFIXES``. This is
  an echo of the ``PROBE_PATH_SUFFIXES`` from the previous translation
  response. If a file with one of the given suffixes exists, then
  ``PROBE_SUFFIX`` specifies the first existing suffix. If no
  ``PROBE_SUFFIX`` follows, then no file was found.

- ``FILE_NOT_FOUND``: The specified file does not exist. The
  translation server is asked to provide an alternate translation. This
  is an echo of the ``FILE_NOT_FOUND`` from the previous translation
  response.

- ``ENOTDIR``: The specified file does not exist, but a portion of the
  path points to a regular file. This is an echo of the ``ENOTDIR``
  packet from the previous translation response. The given URI has been
  shortened: the last slash and what follows has been moved to
  ``PATH_INFO``. This may be repeated until the regular file has been
  found.

- ``DIRECTORY_INDEX``: The specified file is a directory. The
  translation server is asked to provide an alternate translation. This
  is an echo of the ``DIRECTORY_INDEX`` from the previous translation
  response.

.. _want:

- ``WANT``: causes :program:`beng-proxy` to submit the same translation
  request again, with this packet echoed plus the requested packets. The
  payload is an array of 16-bit integers with requested packet ids. The
  following packets are allowed/supported here: ``LISTENER_TAG``,
  ``LOCAL_ADDRESS``, ``REMOTE_HOST``, ``USER_AGENT``, ``USER``,
  ``UA_CLASS``, ``LANGUAGE``, ``ARGS``, ``QUERY_STRING``

- ``WANT_FULL_URI``: causes beng-proxy to submit the same translation
  request again, with this packet appended (its payload is opaque to
  :program:`beng-proxy`), and with the full request URI (including
  semicolon-arguments and the follow-up suffix, but excluding the query
  string).

- ``INTERNAL_REDIRECT``: causes beng-proxy to submit the same
  translation request again, with this packet appended (its payload is
  opaque to :program:`beng-proxy`). However, instead of the original request URI,
  :program:`beng-proxy` uses the one from this responses’s ``URI`` or
  ``EXPAND_URI`` packet.

- ``CHECK``: obsolete.

- ``AUTH``: Indicates that authentication is necessary (see
  :ref:`auth`).

- ``READ_FILE``: This is a repeated translation in reply to a
  translation response with a ``READ_FILE`` packet. The payload is the
  file contents or empty if the file does not exist (or if there was
  another problem reading the file). This packet is implicitly on
  “vary”.

.. _tresponse:

Response
--------

- ``BEGIN``: Begins the response. The payload is a 8-bit unsigned
  integer specifying the protocol version. The initial protocol version
  is 0.

- ``ENDS``: Finishes the response.

- ``URI``: the “real” raw URI from the HTTP request (without the query
  string); this is used to override the URI, e.g. when :program:`beng-proxy` is
  behind another proxy which modifies the URI

- ``EXPAND_URI``: Override ``URI`` with the given value (after
  expanding).

- ``HOST``: the host name for generating absolute URLs; default is the
  ``Host`` HTTP request header

- ``SCHEME``: the scheme for generating absolute URLs; default is
  ``http``. This packet is useful if :program:`beng-proxy` is behind ``stunnel``

- ``UNTRUSTED``: sets the “untrusted” host name for this request: only
  untrusted widgets matching this host name are allowed. Trusted widgets
  are rejected.
- ``STATUS``: HTTP status code, encoded as ``uint16_t``; this parameter
  is usually not used

- ``HTTP``: load the resource from a remote HTTP server (see
  :ref:`http`).  Payload is an absolute URI starting with ``http://``
  or ``https://``.

- ``HTTP2``: force HTTP/2 for the preceding ``HTTP`` packet.  No
  payload.

- ``CERTIFICATE``: Use the named client certificate for the outbound
  SSL connection (see :ref:`CERTIFICATE <certificate>`).

- ``PIPE``: a local program which reads input from stdin and prints the
  modified resource on stdout (see `6.6 <#pipe>`__).

- ``NFS_SERVER``: Mount the specified NFS server (see `6.7 <#nfs>`__).
  The payload is a string specifying the server’s IP address.

- ``NFS_EXPORT``: Mount the specified path from the NFS server
  specified right before this packet (see `6.7 <#nfs>`__)

- ``LHTTP_PATH``: a local path which is executed as HTTP server

- ``LHTTP_URI``: the request URI for ``LHTTP_PATH``

- ``EXPAND_LHTTP_URI``: the regular expression rule for ``LHTTP_URI``

- ``LHTTP_HOST``: the “Host” request header for ``LHTTP_PATH``

- ``CONCURRENCY``: a 16 bit integer specifying the maximum number of
  concurrent requests to this server (LHTTP only currently)

- ``NON_BLOCKING``: If present, make the socket passed to a child
  process non-blocking (LHTTP only currently). This is needed by NodeJS
  0.12.

- ``CGI``: a local path which is executed as CGI script (see
  :ref:`t-cgi`)

- ``FASTCGI``: a local path which is executed as FastCGI script (see
  :ref:`t-cgi`)

- ``WAS``: a local path which is executed as WAS application (see
  :ref:`t-cgi`)

- ``REDIRECT``: another alternative to ``PATH``: redirect the HTTP
  client to this URL; ``STATUS`` must be set to one of the HTTP 3xx
  codes

- ``EXPAND_REDIRECT``: Override ``REDIRECT`` with the given value
  (after expanding); see `7.4 <#tresponse>`__.

- ``REDIRECT_QUERY_STRING``: Append the query string to the given
  ``REDIRECT`` URL.

- ``REDIRECT_FULL_URI``: Use the full request URI path (including
  semicolon-arguments and the follow-up suffix, but excluding the query
  string) for expanding ``REDIRECT``. This packet must be preceded by
  ``BASE``, ``EASY_BASE`` and ``REDIRECT``. It makes sense to combine it
  with ``REDIRECT_QUERY_STRING``.

.. _httpsonly:

- ``HTTPS_ONLY``: Allow this request to be handled only on
  encrypted connections (HTTPS with SSL/TLS). If the connection is
  encrypted, then this is a no-op. If it is not encrypted, the server
  generates a permanent redirect to ``https://``. The payload may
  contain a 16 bit integer specifying the port number (zero means
  default port).

- ``BOUNCE``: Redirects the browser with a ``303 See Other`` status to
  this URI, and appends the current absolute URI (form-encoded). This is
  useful to redirect to another server, which will need to redirect back
  to the original URI.

- ``MESSAGE``: Generate a response with the given body (``text/plain``
  and US-ASCII).

- ``TINY_IMAGE``: Generate a response with a tiny (one-pixel GIF) image.

- ``EXPAND_PATH``: Override the ``PATH`` with the given value
  (applicable to static files, CGI, FastCGI, WAS, ``HTTP``). Backslash
  references are expanded to the value of the match group of ``REGEX``.
  In the presence of this packet, the URI suffix after the base will not
  be appended to other paths. The translation server is responsible for
  ensuring that the resulting path cannot point to files that are not
  supposed to be published. :program:`beng-proxy` disallows ``/../`` sequences in
  the URI tail string, but it may nonetheless be possible for an
  attacker to break out if the regular expression and the expansion
  string are phrased improperly. (Since version 2.0.5)

- ``SITE``: optional identification or name of the site this resource
  belongs to

- ``EXPAND_SITE``: provide a cache expansion for the preceding ``SITE``

- ``SESSION_SITE``: Set a ``SITE`` for all requests in the current
  session. This packet with an empty payload can be used to clear the
  session’s ``SITE`` value.

- ``DOCUMENT_ROOT``: base directory of the site; may also be passed
  after a ``CGI``/``DELEGATE`` command, to set the document root only
  for this CGI/delegate

- ``BASE``: Defines a realm in the URI space. The payload specifies
  the URI prefix (of the original request URI, ending with a slash)
  which contains this realm. All resources in this realm can be
  addressed by :program:`beng-proxy` with a trivial pattern: append
  the relative URI (within the realm) to the resource address
  (e.g. the ``PATH``, ``HTTP`` or ``PATH_INFO`` value).

  The address in this response applies to request URI, not the base URI
  (to allow backwards compatibility with translation clients which do not
  support this packet).

  Example: in the request, ``URI`` is ``/foo/bar/index.html``; in the
  response, ``PATH`` is ``/var/www/foo/bar/index.html`` and ``BASE`` is
  ``/foo/``. The :program:`beng-proxy` translation cache now knows: if a request
  on ``/foo/test.png`` is received, it can serve
  :file:`/var/www/foo/test.png` without querying the translation server.

- ``UNSAFE_BASE``: Modifier for ``BASE``: omit the security checks.
  This allows ``/../`` to be part of the remaining URI, possibly
  allowing clients to break out of the given directory.

- ``EASY_BASE``: Modifier ``BASE`` which aims to simplify its usage:
  the resource address given in the response refers to the ``BASE``, not
  to the actual request URI. It is important to include the trailing
  slash which is part of ``BASE`` in the resource address (e.g.
  ``BASE``\ =”/foo/”, ``PATH``\ =”/var/www/foo/”). :program:`beng-proxy` applies
  the URI suffix before handling the HTTP request.

- ``REGEX``: Reuse a cached response only if the request ``URI``
  matches the specified regular expression (Perl compatible, anchored).
  This works only when a BASE was specified. (Since version 1.3.2)

- ``INVERSE_REGEX``: Don’t apply the cached response if the request
  ``URI`` matches the specified regular expression (Perl compatible,
  anchored). (Since version 1.3.2)

- ``REGEX_TAIL``: Apply ``REGEX`` and ``INVERSE_REGEX`` to the URI
  suffix following ``BASE`` instead of the whole request URI. (Since
  version 4.0.21)

- ``REGEX_UNESCAPE``: Unescape the URI for ``REGEX``.

- ``INVERSE_REGEX_UNESCAPE``: Unescape the URI for ``INVERSE_REGEX``.

- ``REGEX_ON_HOST_URI``: Prepend the ``Host`` header to the string used
  with ``REGEX`` and ``INVERSE_REGEX``.

- ``REGEX_ON_USER_URI``: Prepend the user name (from ``USER``) and a
  ’@’ to the string used with ``REGEX`` and ``INVERSE_REGEX``.

- ``FILTER``: the next resource address (``HTTP``, ``CGI``) will denote
  an output filter, see section :ref:`filter` for details.

- ``CHAIN``: similar to ``FILTER``, but the translation server is
  asked again after the current response has been generated.  See
  section :ref:`chain` for details.

.. _cache_tag:

- ``CACHE_TAG``: If present after ``FILTER`` and the filter's response
  is cached, then this tag will be assigned to the cache item.  This
  tag can be used with :ref:`FLUSH_FILTER_CACHE <flush_filter_cache>`
  to flush only a part of the filter cache.

- ``REVEAL_USER``: If present after ``FILTER``, then the filter will
  see ``X-CM4all-BENG-User`` as an additional request header (if a user
  is logged in).

- ``FILTER_4XX``: Enable filtering of client errors (status 4xx).
  Without this flag, only successful responses (2xx) are filtered. Only
  useful when at least one ``FILTER`` was specified.

- ``SUBST_YAML_FILE``: Substitute variables with values from the given
  YAML file. The payload consists of 3 strings separated by a null byte:
  the prefix for variable names (example: “``foo.``”; may be empty; will
  be stripped before looking up in the YAML file), the YAML file path
  (absolute, i.e. starting with slash) and a path inside the YAML file
  where YAML map to be used is found (segments separated with dots; may
  be empty). Example: “``foo.\0/the/file.yaml\0inside.file``”. Inside
  the specified YAML map, child maps can be addressed using the dot as a
  separator, e.g. “``foo.bar``” looks up the key ``bar`` in a map found
  under key ``foo``. See section `15 <#subst>`__ for more information.

- ``SUBST_ALT_SYNTAX``: Use the alternative variable reference syntax.
  This setting is enabled for all substitution filters of this response
  (but not for substitution filters of embedded widgets). No payload.
  See section `15 <#subst>`__ for more information.

- ``PROCESS``: enables the :program:`beng-proxy` processor, see section
  `11 <#processor>`__

- ``PROCESS_TEXT``: enables the :program:`beng-proxy` text processor (Since
  version 1.3.2)

- ``PROCESS_CSS``: enables the :program:`beng-proxy` CSS processor

- ``DOMAIN``: the domain name for partitioned frames

- ``SESSION``: a session identifier generated by the translation
  server, see section `7.17 <#sessions>`__

- ``USER``: the user name associated with this session

- ``REALM``: a realm name for this session. An existing session matches
  only if its realm matches the current request’s realm; on mismatch, a
  new session with the same public id is created for this realm. If this
  packet is not specified in the translation response, then the “Host”
  request header is used.

- ``REALM_FROM_AUTH_BASE``: Copy the ``AUTH`` or ``AUTH_FILE`` contents
  to ``REALM`` (i.e. without ``APPEND_AUTH``).

- ``TRANSPARENT``: Transparent proxy: forward URI arguments to the
  request handler instead of using them. As a side effect, session
  handling is disabled.

- ``LANGUAGE``: overrides the ``Accept-Language`` request header for
  this session

- ``DISCARD_SESSION``: discard the current browser session

- ``SECURE_COOKIE``: Set the "secure" flag on the session cookie.

- ``HOME``: home directory of the account this site belongs to; will be
  mounted in the jail; defaults to ``DOCUMENT_ROOT``

- ``EXPAND_HOME``: Expansion for ``HOME``.

- ``ADDRESS``: after each ``HTTP`` packet, there must be one or more
  ``ADDRESS`` packets which specify the resolved addresses. The payload
  of each is a ``struct sockaddr``.

- ``STICKY``: Make the resource address "sticky", i.e. attempt to
  forward all requests of a session to the same worker.

- ``VIEW``: starts a new view; the body of the packet is the name of
  the view (ASCII letters, digits, underscore, dash only). Each view can
  have different address/processor/filter settings. The first view (the
  one before the first ``VIEW`` packet) is the default and has no name.

- ``MAX_AGE``: a 32 bit unsigned integer specifying the number of
  seconds the preceding piece of information is valid without having
  to revalidate. A value of 0 specifies that :program:`beng-proxy`
  should not remember this value at all. Without this packet, the
  maximum age is not limited.  Currently, this is only supported for
  the following packets:

- ``BEGIN`` (refers to the whole translate response), ``USER``

.. _tvary:

- ``VARY``: similar to the HTTP ``Vary`` response header; the
  payload contains an array of translation request commands which this
  response depends upon.

  The following request packets are currently supported: ``PARAM``,
  ``SESSION``, ``LISTENER_TAG``, ``LOCAL_ADDRESS``, ``REMOTE_HOST``,
  ``HOST``, ``LANGUAGE``, ``USER_AGENT``, ``UA_CLASS``,
  ``QUERY_STRING``, ``USER``, ``INTERNAL_REDIRECT``, ``ENOTDIR``.

  The following request packets are on “vary” implicitly:
  ``WIDGET_TYPE``, ``CONTENT_TYPE_LOOKUP``, ``URI``, ``STATUS``,
  ``CHECK``, ``WANT_FULL_URI``, ``PROBE_PATH_SUFFIXES``,
  ``PROBE_SUFFIX``, ``FILE_NOT_FOUND``, ``DIRECTORY_INDEX``, ``WANT``.

- ``INVALIDATE``: Invalidates existing translation cache items which
  depend on some of the request values. The payload has the same format as
  ``VARY``. Additionally, the ``URI`` command is supported, to invalidate
  all items pointing to the request URI, and ``SITE`` to invalidate all
  items with the given site name.

  If you specify more than one command, all must match. If you list a
  command which was not specified in the request (or a command which
  is not supported here), nothing will be deleted.

  Example: ``INVALIDATE`` on ``SESSION`` invalidates all cache items for
  the current session.

- ``REQUEST_HEADER_FORWARD``: See :ref:`tfwdheader`

- ``RESPONSE_HEADER_FORWARD``: See :ref:`tfwdheader`

- ``WWW_AUTHENTICATE``: the ``WWW-Authenticate`` response header sent
  to the client (see RFC 2617). Currently, this is never cached. This
  exact behavior is subject to change in the future, and will be
  cacheable.

- ``AUTHENTICATION_INFO``: the ``Authentication-Info`` response header
  sent to the client (see RFC 2617).

- ``HEADER``: A custom HTTP response header sent to the client. Name
  and value are separated by a colon (without any whitespace). This will
  not override existing headers. It is not allowed to set hop-by-hop
  headers (RFC 2616 13.5.1) this way. This packet shall only be a last
  resort, when there is no other way to set a required response header.

- ``EXPAND_HEADER``: Same as ``HEADER``, but expand the value.

- ``REQUEST_HEADER``: A custom HTTP request header for the backend
  server. Name and value are separated by a colon (without any
  whitespace). This will override existing headers. It is not allowed to
  set hop-by-hop headers (RFC 2616 13.5.1) this way.

- ``EXPAND_REQUEST_HEADER``: Same as ``REQUEST_HEADER``, but expand the
  value.

- ``CONTENT_TYPE_LOOKUP``: Indicates that the translation server is
  willing to look up ``Content-Type`` by file name suffix. See
  :ref:`ctlookup` for a detailed description.

- ``ERROR_DOCUMENT``: Indicates that the translation server is willing
  to provide a custom error document. See :ref:`errdoc` for a detailed
  description.

- ``PROBE_PATH_SUFFIXES``: Check if the ``TEST_PATH`` (or
  ``EXPAND_TEST_PATH``) plus one of the suffixes from ``PROBE_SUFFIX``
  exists (regular files only). :program:`beng-proxy` will send another
  translation request, echoing this packet and echoing the
  ``PROBE_SUFFIX`` that was found. This packet must be followed by at
  least two ``PROBE_SUFFIX`` packets.

- ``FILE_NOT_FOUND``: Indicates that the translation server would like
  to provide an alternate translation when the specified file does not
  exist. :program:`beng-proxy` will repeat the translation request with this
  packet echoed. This is supported by the following address types:
  ``PATH``, ``CGI``, ``FASTCGI``, ``WAS``, ``LHTTP_PATH``.

- ``ENOTDIR``: Indicates that the translation server would like to
  provide an alternate translation when the specified file does not
  exist, but a portion of the path points to a regular file.

- ``DIRECTORY_INDEX``: Indicates that the translation server would like
  to provide an alternate translation when the specified file is a
  directory. :program:`beng-proxy` will repeat the translation request with this
  packet echoed.

- ``TEST_PATH``: Test the specified file. If this packet is not
  present, then the path from the resource address is used (``PATH``,
  ``CGI``, ``FASTCGI``, ``LHTTP_PATH``). Affects the packets
  ``FILE_NOT_FOUND``, ``DIRECTORY_INDEX``, ``ENOTDIR``.

- ``EXPAND_TEST_PATH``: Override the ``TEST_PATH`` with the given
  value. Backslash references are expanded to the value of the match
  group of ``REGEX``. (Since version 4.0.34)

- ``COOKIE_DOMAIN``: Set the session cookie’s "Domain" attribute.

- ``COOKIE_HOST``: Override the cookie host name. This host name is
  used for storing and looking up cookies in the jar. It is especially
  useful for protocols that don’t have a host name, such as CGI.

- ``EXPAND_COOKIE_HOST``: Expansion for ``COOKIE_HOST``.

- ``COOKIE_PATH``: Override the cookie’s ``Path`` attribute. This is
  sent to the client when :program:`beng-proxy` generates a new session cookie.
  Be careful with overlapping locations that create conflicting cookies.

- ``VALIDATE_MTIME``: A cached response is valid only if the file
  specified in this packet is not modified. The first 8 bytes is the
  mtime (seconds since UNIX epoch), the rest is the absolute path to a
  regular file (symlinks not supported). The translation fails when the
  file does not exist or is inaccessible. The special value 0 matches
  only when the file does not exist; as soon as the file appears, the
  cached response will be discarded.

- ``READ_FILE``: Asks :program:`beng-proxy` to read the specified (small) file
  and submit another translation request with the file contents in
  another ``READ_FILE`` packet.

- ``EXPAND_READ_FILE``: Expansion for ``READ_FILE``.

.. _tdefer:

- ``DEFER``: Defer the request to the next translation server.

- ``PREVIOUS``: Tells beng-proxy to use the resource address of the
  previous translation response. Only allowed if the request contains a
  ``AUTH`` packet.

- ``UNCACHED``: Disable the HTTP cache for the given resource address.

If the translation server does not provide the ``CONTENT_TYPE``
header, :program:`beng-proxy` will attempt to discover the file type
from its extended attributes (see :ref:`xattr`).

To send a standard error page, the translation server sends a response
containing only the ``STATUS`` parameter with the desired HTTP status.

Sending a packet twice is regarded an error. It cannot be used to
override a previous value.

.. _tstatic:

Static files
------------

See :ref:`static` for an explanation of static file resources.

The response packet ``PATH`` declares a static file that will be
served.  The following packets are available:

- ``PATH``: Absolute path of the local file to be served.

- ``EXPAND_PATH``: Override the path with the given value (after
  expanding); see :ref:`tresponse`.

- ``DEFLATED``: Absolute path of a precompressed version of the file.
  The file is compressed with the “deflate” algorithm, without ``gzip``
  headers. May follow the ``PATH`` packet.

- ``GZIPPED``: Absolute path of a precompressed version of the file.
  The file is compressed with ``gzip``. May follow the ``PATH`` packet.

- ``AUTO_GZIPPED``: Build the precompressed path by appending “``.gz``”
  to the ``PATH``. Unlike ``GZIPPED``, this is compatible with ``BASE``.

- ``AUTO_DEFLATE``: Deflate the response on-the-fly if the client
  accepts it. This consumes a lot of CPU and should only be used for
  dynamic responses which can be compressed well.

- ``AUTO_GZIP``: Compress the response on-the-fly if the client accepts
  the ``gzip`` encoding. This consumes a lot of CPU and should only be
  used for dynamic responses which can be compressed well.

- ``CONTENT_TYPE``: MIME type of the file (optional)

- ``EXPIRES_RELATIVE``: Generate an ``Expires`` response header. The
  payload is a 32 bit integer specifying the number of seconds from now.

.. _tdelegate:

Delegates
---------

If ``DELEGATE`` follows after ``PATH``, then this file will be opened
through the “delegate” process. See :ref:`delegate` for an
explanation.

- ``DELEGATE``: The payload is the path of the delegate program.

- ``DOCUMENT_ROOT``: See :ref:`tresponse`.

- ``HOME``: See :ref:`tresponse`.

See :ref:`rlimits` for how to configure resource limits and :ref:`ns`
for how to configure namespaces.

Proxying requests
-----------------

When proxying HTTP requests with the a ``HTTP`` packet,
:program:`beng-proxy` forwards the request to the specified location
(with headers filtered as described in :ref:`tfwdheader`), including
the HTTP method and the request body. There is one exception: if
``PROCESS`` is enabled and a widget is focused (see :ref:`focus`), the
other HTTP server receives a ``GET`` request without a body, because
the focused widget is going to receive the request body.

If the filter URL starts with a slash, :program:`beng-proxy` assumes it is the
absolute path to a Unix socket.

.. _t-cgi:

CGI, FastCGI, WAS and Pipe
--------------------------

The protocols CGI, FastCGI and WAS can be used to generate or filter
resources (see :ref:`cgi` and :ref:`was`). A “pipe” can be used as a
filter (see :ref:`pipe`). The following packets are used to choose the
protocol:

- ``CGI``: a local path which is executed as CGI script

- ``FASTCGI``: a local path which is executed as FastCGI script. To
  connect to an existing FastCGI server, specify one or more ``ADDRESS``
  packets.

- ``WAS``: a local path which is executed as WAS application

- ``PIPE``: a local program which reads input from stdin and prints the
  modified resource on stdout

The following packets can be used to specify more details:

- ``EXPAND_PATH``: Override the executable path with the given value
  (after expanding); see :ref:`tresponse`.

- ``APPEND``: appends an argument to the command line

- ``EXPAND_APPEND``: provide a cache expansion for the preceding
  ``APPEND``

- ``PAIR``: adds a FastCGI/WAS parameter in the form ``KEY=VALUE``.

- ``EXPAND_PAIR``: provide a cache expansion for the preceding ``PAIR``

- ``SETENV``: adds an environment variable for CGI, FastCGI, WAS or
  LHTTP in the form ``KEY=VALUE``.

- ``EXPAND_SETENV``: provide a cache expansion for the preceding
  ``SETENV``

- ``PATH_INFO``: optional URI substring which was left after finding
  the file

- ``EXPAND_PATH_INFO``: Override the ``PATH_INFO`` with the given
  value. Backslash references are expanded to the value of the match
  group of ``REGEX``. In the presence of this packet, the URI suffix
  after the base will not be appended to other paths. (Since version
  2.0.4)

- ``DOCUMENT_ROOT``: set the document root passed to this CGI process

- ``EXPAND_DOCUMENT_ROOT``: Override the ``DOCUMENT_ROOT`` with the
  given value. Backslash references are expanded to the value of the
  match group of ``REGEX``. (Since version 6.0)

- ``INTERPRETER``: run a CGI script with the specified interpreter:
  invokes the specified interpreter with the mapped file path added as a
  command-line argument. This can be used to run Perl scripts without
  setting the “execute” bit.

- ``ACTION``: run the specified CGI program instead of the mapped file.
  This program reads the mapped file path from ``SCRIPT_FILENAME`` and
  loads this script. This is modeled after the Apache directive
  ``Action``, and implements a protocol understood by PHP and COMA.

- ``SCRIPT_NAME``: the ``SCRIPT_NAME`` environment variable for a CGI

- ``EXPAND_SCRIPT_NAME``: Override the ``SCRIPT_NAME`` with the given
  value. Backslash references are expanded to the value of the match
  group of ``REGEX``. (Since version 4.0.33)

- ``AUTO_BASE``: Auto-calculate the ``BASE`` from ``PATH_INFO`` (only
  CGI, FastCGI and WAS)

- ``REQUEST_URI_VERBATIM``: Pass the CGI parameter ``REQUEST_URI``
  verbatim instead of building it from ``SCRIPT_NAME``, ``PATH_INFO``
  and ``QUERY_STRING``. (Since version 16.29)

See :ref:`rlimits` for how to configure resource limits and :ref:`ns`
for how to configure namespaces.

Local HTTP
----------

\|l|X\|

| ``APPEND``: appends an argument to the command line

| ``EXPAND_APPEND``: provide a cache expansion for the preceding
  ``APPEND``

See `7.11 <#rlimits>`__ for how to configure resource limits and
`7.13 <#ns>`__ for how to configure namespaces.

.. _tfwdheader:

Forwarding HTTP Headers
-----------------------

There are two translation packets which control which HTTP headers are
going to be forwarded:

- ``REQUEST_HEADER_FORWARD``: this packet specifies which request
  headers are forwarded to the request handler. The payload is a list
  of group/mode pairs (``struct beng_header_forward_packet``).

- ``RESPONSE_HEADER_FORWARD``: same as ``REQUEST_HEADER_FORWARD``, but
  applies to response headers forwarded to the client.

Group is one of:

- ``IDENTITY``: headers ``Via`` and ``X-Forwarded-For``

- ``CAPABILITIES``: ``Server``, ``User-Agent``, ``Accept-*``

- ``COOKIE``: ``Cookie[2]``, ``Set-Cookie[2]``

- ``FORWARD``: forward information about the original request/response
  that would usually not be visible. If set to ``MANGLE``, then
  ``Host`` is translated to ``X-Forwarded-Host``.

- ``CORS``: forward `CORS <http://www.w3.org/TR/cors/#syntax>`__
  request/response headers

- ``SECURE``: forward “secure” request/response headers such as
  ``X-CM4all-BENG-User``

- ``SSL``: forward information about the SSL connection, i.e.
  ``X-CM4all-HTTPS``, ``X-CM4all-BENG-Peer-Subject`` and
  ``X-CM4all-BENG-Peer-Issuer-Subject``

- ``TRANSFORMATION``: forward headers that affect the transformation
  (i.e. ``X-CM4all-View``)

- ``LINK``: forward headers that contain links, such as ``Location``,
  ``Content-Location`` and ``Referer``; if set to ``MANGLE``, then
  :program:`beng-proxy` attempts to rewrite the ``Location`` URI relative to
  itself

- ``AUTH``: forward HTTP authentication headers (e.g. basic/digest
  auth), such as ``WWW-Authenticate``, ``Authentication-Info`` and
  ``authorization``; if set to ``MANGLE``, then
  :program:`beng-proxy` allows the translation server to handle HTTP
  authentication.  The default is ``NO`` for request headers and
  ``MANGLE`` for response headers.

  ``MANGLE`` on the request header settings generates an
  ``Autorization`` request header containing :samp:`bearer USER`,
  where ``USER`` is the current user as specified by the ``USER``
  translation response packet.  This can be used for servers which do
  not understand the ``X-CM4all-BENG-User`` request header (from
  header group ``SECURE``).

- ``OTHER``: other end-to-end headers not explicitly mentioned here

- ``ALL``: all of the above except for ``SECURE`` and ``SSL``

Mode is one of:

- ``NO``: don’t forward the headers

- ``YES``: forward the headers

- ``MANGLE``: :program:`beng-proxy` processes the headers

- ``BOTH``: both :program:`beng-proxy` and the backend server process
  the headers (special case for cookie headers, which is a combination
  of ``YES`` and ``MANGLE``)

:program:`beng-proxy`\ ’s session management is only active when
``COOKIE`` is ``MANGLE`` (which is the default) or ``BOTH``. The
behavior of the ``COOKIE`` setting on widgets is undefined.

.. _rlimits:

Resource Limits
---------------

The packet ``RLIMITS`` specifies Linux resource limits for child
processes. Its payload is a string, a sequence of resource limit codes
and their respective limit values. The following resource limits are
supported:

- ``t`` (``CPU``): CPU time limit in seconds.

- ``f`` (``FSIZE``): The maximum size of files that the process may
  create.

- ``d`` (``DATA``): The maximum size of the process’s data segment.

- ``s`` (``STACK``): The maximum size of the process stack, in bytes.

- ``c`` (``CORE``): Maximum size of core file.

- ``m`` (``RSS``): The limit of the process’s resident set, in pages.

- ``u`` (``NPROC``): The maximum number of processes that can be
  created for the real user ID.

- ``n`` (``NOFILE``): The maximum file descriptor number that can be
  opened by this process.

- ``l`` (``MEMLOCK``): The maximum number of bytes of memory that may
  be locked into RAM.

- ``v`` (``AS``): The maximum size of the process’s virtual memory
  (address space) in bytes.

- ``i`` (``SIGPENDING``): The maximum number of signals that may be
  queued.

- ``q`` (``MSGQUEUE``): The maximum number of bytes that can be
  allocated for POSIX message queues.

- ``e`` (``NICE``): A ceiling to which the process’s nice value can be
  raised.

- ``r`` (``RTPRIO``): Ceiling on the real-time priority that may be set
  for this process.

The letter in the first column is the code for the payload, to be
followed by ’!’ (for “unlimited”) or the numeric limit value (with
optional prefix “K”, “M” or “G” for “kibi”, “mebi”, “gibi”).

The limits are applied to both “soft” and “hard” by default. The code
``S`` changes all following specifications to “soft” only, and ``H``
does the same for “hard”.

Example::

   c!Sv1Gn256Hn512

Explanation:

- ``c!`` unlimited core file size (both soft and hard)

- ``S``: the following will be soft limits

- ``v1G``: limit address space to :math:`1 GiB` (soft; the hard limit
  is unchanged)

- ``n256``: maximum 256 file descriptors (soft)

- ``H``: the following will be hard limits

- ``n512``: maximum 256 file descriptors (hard)

.. _ns:

Namespaces
----------

Child processes such as FastCGI programs can run in separate Linux
namespaces to improve separation from the rest of the server. That
requires a fairly new Linux kernel.

Articles on http://lwn.net/ on Linux namespaces:

- `Namespaces in operation, part 1: namespaces
  overview <https://lwn.net/Articles/531114/>`__

- `Namespaces in operation, part 3: PID
  namespaces <http://lwn.net/Articles/531419/>`__

- `Namespaces in operation, part 4: more on PID
  namespaces <http://lwn.net/Articles/532748/>`__

- `Namespaces in operation, part 5: User
  namespaces <http://lwn.net/Articles/532593/>`__

- `Namespaces in operation, part 6: more on user
  namespaces <https://lwn.net/Articles/540087/>`__

- `Network namespaces <http://lwn.net/Articles/219794/>`__

User Namespaces
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The translation packet ``USER_NAMESPACE`` launches the process in a
new user namespace. This creates a new mapping for user ids inside
this namespace. More importantly, this gives the process a full set of
capabilities. This is a precondition for some of the other namespaces.

Requires Linux 3.8 or newer.

PID Namespaces
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The translation packet ``PID_NAMESPACE`` launches the process in a new
PID namespace. This creates a new mapping for process ids inside this
namespace. Only processes in this namespace are visible and only these
can be killed.

The translation packet ``PID_NAMESPACE_NAME`` reassociates the process
with an existing PID namespace, selected by its name (in the payload).
This requires the ``cm4all-spawn`` daemon, which manages PID
namespaces.

By default, other processes are actually still visible through
:file:`/proc`. For complete PID namespace support, one would need to
mount a new ``proc`` filesystem connected to the new namespace.

Requires Linux 3.8 or newer.

Cgroup Namespaces
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The translation packet ``CGROOUP_NAMESPACE`` launches the process in a
new cgroup namespace.

Requires Linux 4.6 or newer.

Network Namespaces
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The translation packet ``NETWORK_NAMESPACE`` launches the process in a
new network namespace. Without further configuration, this leaves the
process without access to the network, because there is no network
device in the new namespace.

The packet ``NETWORK_NAMESPACE_NAME`` instead reassociates the process
with an existing network namespace configured with ``ip netns``.

Requires Linux 2.6.29 or newer.

Mount Namespaces
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A mount namespace makes the VFS mount table private to the new
process.  This namespace is created implicitly by the packets
described in this section.

- ``PIVOT_ROOT`` works like the ``chroot`` command; its payload
  specifies the directory which will be the new root. All other mounts
  will be removed from the namespace. The new root must contain a
  top-level directory called ``mnt``. It will be mounted read-only and
  with option ``nosuid``.

- ``MOUNT_ROOT_TMPFS`` creates an empty read-only ``tmpfs`` as the
  filesystem root. All required mountpoints will be created, but the
  filesystem will contain nothing else.

- ``MOUNT_PROC`` mounts a new read-only instance of the ``proc``
  filesystem.

- ``MOUNT_HOME`` bind-mounts the home directory (specified by
  ``HOME``) to the given directory within the ``PIVOT_ROOT``. It will
  be mounted with option ``nosuid``.

- ``MOUNT_TMP_TMPFS`` mounts a new ``tmpfs`` on :file:`/tmp`. This is
  private to the namespace and is deleted when the process exits. The
  payload may specify additional ``tmpfs`` mount options such as
  ``size=64M``.

- ``MOUNT_TMPFS`` mounts a new (user-writable) ``tmpfs`` on the given
  path. This is private to the namespace and is deleted when the
  process exits.

- ``MOUNT_EMPTY`` mounts a new (read-only) ``tmpfs`` on the given
  path. Inside this filesystem, mount points will be created
  automatically.  Other than that, it can be used to hide parts of an
  existing filesystem.

- ``BIND_MOUNT`` mounts arbitrary directories from the old root into
  the new root. The payload is the source directory (absolute path
  within the old root) and the target directory (absolute path within
  the new root), separated by a null byte. The new mount will have the
  options ``ro,noexec,nosuid,nodev``.

- ``EXPAND_BIND_MOUNT`` is the same as ``BIND_MOUNT``, but the source
  directory is expanded using ``REGEX`` results.

- ``BIND_MOUNT_RW`` and ``EXPAND_BIND_MOUNT_RW`` do the same, just in
  writable mode (mount option ``rw``). ``BIND_MOUNT_EXEC`` and
  ``EXPAND_BIND_MOUNT_EXEC`` omit the ``noexec`` option. (There is no
  way to make a mount both writable and executable.)

- ``PIVOT_ROOT`` depends on user namespaces. ``MOUNT_PROC``,
  ``MOUNT_HOME`` and ``MOUNT_TMP_TMPFS`` depend on ``PIVOT_ROOT``,
  user namespaces and PID namespaces.

UTS Namespaces
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A UTS namespace allows manipulating the host name reported by the
kernel. ``UTS_NAMESPACE`` creates the namespace; its payload is the new
host name.

Namespaces Summary
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following example describes part of a translation packets that
attempts to execute a child process as securely as possible::

   USER_NAMESPACE
   PID_NAMESPACE
   NETWORK_NAMESPACE
   PIVOT_ROOT "/var/lib/lxc/wheezy/rootfs"
   HOME "/var/www/foo"
   MOUNT_HOME "/home/www"

The child process cannot see or kill processes processes other than the
ones that were started by itself. It cannot access the network. It lives
in another filesystem namespace. It can access the directory
:file:`/var/www/foo` at :file:`/home/www`. The ``proc`` filesystem is not
mounted.

Cgroups
-------

Control cgroups (“cgroups”) are a Linux kernel feature for grouping
processes. They are useful in many ways, such as assigning/accounting
resources (CPU, memory, network bandwidth, ...).

:program:`beng-proxy` can use ``cgroups`` only when launched with
``systemd``.

``CGROUP`` specifies a ``cgroup`` name for the new child process. It
is a name below :program:`beng-proxy`\ ’s own cgroup assigned by
``systemd``. All controllers managed by ``systemd`` are enabled.

``CGROUP_SET`` set a cgroup attribute. Payload is in the form
``controller.name=value``, e.g. ``cpu.shares=42``.

.. _childoptions:

Other Child Process Options
---------------------------

- ``UID_GID`` specifies uid and gid (and supplementary groups) for the
  child process. Payload is an array of 32 bit integers. All selected
  users and groups must be explicitly allowed with the ``user`` and
  ``group`` settings in the ``spawn`` configuration. The default is to
  run child processes with the same unprivileged credentials as
  :program:`beng-proxy` itself (or the one specified with
  ``--spawn-user``).

- ``NO_NEW_PRIVS`` permanently disables new privileges for the child
  process. That is, ``setuid`` and ``setgid`` bits are ignored on
  executed programs. It is recommended to set this flag on **all**
  processes by default, unless there are strong reasons against it.

- ``FORBID_USER_NS`` forbids the child process to create new user
  namespaces and thus gaining a full set of capabilities. This is
  useful because there have been lots of namespace-related
  vulnerabilities in the kernel.

- ``FORBID_MULTICAST`` forbids the child process to add multicast
  group memberships. This is useful because it disallows snooping on
  the host’s multicast traffic.

- ``FORBID_BIND`` makes ``bind()`` and ``listen()`` return ``EACCES``.

- ``STDERR_PATH`` specifies an absolute path that will be created. The
  child’s error messages will be appended there. ``STDERR_NULL``
  redirects standard error to :file:`/dev/null` instead.

- ``STDERR_POND`` enables the ``child_error_logger`` when it was
  disabled with ``is_default="no"`` (see :ref:`child_error_logger`).

- ``CHILD_TAG`` specifies a “tag” string for the child process. This
  can be used to address groups of child processes.

.. _filter:

Filters
-------

The translation server can tell :program:`beng-proxy` to apply a
filter to the resource by sending the ``FILTER`` command. It is
followed by a packet specifying the filter server (``HTTP``, ``CGI``,
``FASTCGI``, ``PIPE``).

A filter server is a HTTP server. :program:`beng-proxy` sends the
original resource with a POST request and expects the filtered
resource as response.

If the filter returns status ``200 OK`` or ``204 No Content``, then
the previous status code is used instead.

It is important that a filter is completely stateless. Running the
same filter twice on the same source must always render the same
result, at any time.

There may be more than one filter; the order of the ``PROCESS`` and
``FILTER`` packets is important.

According to the HTTP specification, ``POST`` requests are not
cached. To gain the necessary performance, :program:`beng-proxy`
caches filter results, extending the HTTP specification. This is
limited to resources which have an *ETag* response header, because
:program:`beng-proxy` uses the *ETag* internally to address cache
items.

.. _chain:

Chains
------

Chained request handlers behave similar to ``FILTER``: the current
handler's response is passed to the next handler as ``POST`` request.
But unlike ``FILTER``, :program:`beng-proxy` waits for the current
handler to generate the response, and only then asks the translation
server for further instructions.  This is useful in situations where
one handler prepares something which the translation server needs to
decide about the next stage.

To enable chaining, the translation sends a response specifying the
request handler plus a ``CHAIN`` packet with opaque payload.  Once
that request handler has generated the response, :program:`beng-proxy`
sends another translation request containing a copy of the ``CHAIN``
packet and a ``STATUS`` packet.  Additionally, the ``CHAIN_HEADER``
may contain the value of the ``X-CM4all-Chain`` response header, if
one exists in the current HTTP response.

Now the translation server generates another request handler, or
``BREAK_CHAIN`` to send the pending response to the browser as-is.

Example::

 request 1:
  URI "/chain/"
  HOST "example.com"
  ...

 response 1:
  HTTP "http://foo/bar/"
  CHAIN "42"

 request 2:
  CHAIN "42"
  CHAIN_HEADER "xyz"
  STATUS "200"

 response 2:
  WAS "/the/filter/program"

.. _sessions:

Sessions
--------

:program:`beng-proxy` lets the translation server manage a “session”
variable, which may be empty, or contain an opaque string. It is up to
the translation server to manage its contents. With every translation
request, :program:`beng-proxy` sends its contents unless it is empty
(in which case it omits this parameter). With every response, the
translation server may provide a new value (which may be empty).

External Session Manager
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sometimes, the translation server involves an external entity in its
session management, for example to handle authentication. The
translation server can then ask :program:`beng-proxy` to handle
refreshes by sending a ``GET`` to a specified HTTP server.

The packet ``EXTERNAL_SESSION_MANAGER`` contains the HTTP URL, and
must be followed by one or more ``ADDRESS`` packets (just like the
``HTTP`` packet). After that, the packet
``EXTERNAL_SESSION_KEEPALIVE`` may contain a 16 bit integer specifying
the refresh interval in seconds.

The refresh is performed only while handling a request for this
session.

Example::

   EXTERNAL_SESSION_MANAGER=http://foo/session/42
   ADDRESS=192.168.1.100:80
   EXTERNAL_SESSION_KEEPALIVE=300

This example sends a ``GET`` request every 5 minutes to
``http://foo/session/42`` on IP address ``192.168.1.100``.

.. _ctlookup:

``Content-Type`` Lookup
-----------------------

The presence of ``CONTENT_TYPE_LOOKUP`` in a translation response
indicates that the translation server is willing to look up
``Content-Type`` by file name suffix. It will disable the normal
lookup via *extended attributes*.

When a HTTP request for a static file (local file or NFS file) is
handled, :program:`beng-proxy` will check if the file name has a
“suffix” (short alphanumeric name after a dot). If will ask the
translation server for a ``Content-Type`` for this suffix. This
translation request contains the packets ``CONTENT_TYPE_LOOKUP``
(echoing the server’s packet) and ``SUFFIX`` (containing the non-empty
suffix without the dot).

Example conversation:

- client sends ``BEGIN`` “\\x03”

- client sends ``CONTENT_TYPE_LOOKUP`` “foo”

- client sends ``SUFFIX`` “png”

- client sends ``END``

- server sends ``BEGIN`` “\\x03”

- server sends ``CONTENT_TYPE`` “image/png”

- server sends ``END``

If the suffix is unknown, the translation server may omit the
``CONTENT_TYPE`` packet and only reply with ``BEGIN`` and ``END``.

Additionally, the translation server may specify transformations
(``PROCESS`` or ``FILTER``) for all files of this type. They will be
applied before other transformations from the original translation
response.

.. _errdoc:

Error documents
---------------

Errors from remote servers are forwarded to the client. If no error
document is available, :program:`beng-proxy` generates a simple one.

The translation server indicates that it is willing to override the
error document by sending an empty ``ERROR_DOCUMENT`` packet in the
translation response. As soon as an error occurs (response status
400..599), :program:`beng-proxy` sends another translation request,
consisting of ``ERROR_DOCUMENT``, ``URI`` and ``STATUS``. The payload
of ``ERROR_DOCUMENT`` is opaque to :program:`beng-proxy`, and will be
echoed.

The translation server responds with a pointer to another resource
which shall be used as the error document. If the translation response
is empty, or if the error document itself fails, :program:`beng-proxy`
forwards the original error document (or generates one). The error
document cannot be filtered or processed.

CSRF Protection
---------------

To help applications fix cross-site request forgery vulnerabilities,
:program:`beng-proxy` implements the ``X-CM4all-CSRF-Token`` header.
This feature needs to be enabled explicitly with the following
packets:

- ``REQUIRE_CSRF_TOKEN`` requires a valid token request header for
  modifying requests (``POST``, ``PUT`` etc.).  This option is not
  only supported for regular HTTP requests, but also for widgets (for
  modifying requests to widgets).

- ``SEND_CSRF_TOKEN`` adds a valid token header to successful
  responses.  This option is not supported for widgets.

Covert cross-site requests don't have this header and will be denied,
effectively avoiding this kind of vulnerability.

Clients can obtain a token by inspecting the response header of a
request to a location with ``SEND_CSRF_TOKEN`` enabled.  They may then
use this token in subsequent modifying requests to
``REQUIRE_CSRF_TOKEN`` locations.

This token is specific to the session and expires after a while
(currently an hour).  It can be reused until it expires.

Since this is implemented as a header, this cannot be used for plain
``HTML FORM`` requests.  If the client is a browser, it is necessary
to use the ``XMLHttpRequest`` or ``Fetch`` API which allows sending
custom headers.

.. _registry:

Widget registry
---------------

The translation server provides access to the widget database, where all
widget servers are registered. A widget request can use the following
packets:

- ``WIDGET_TYPE``: the name of the widget type

The translation server’s response consists of these packets:

- ``STATUS``: in case of a lookup error, this packet provides
  the HTTP status code

- ``PATH``, ``CGI``, ``HTTP``: choose one of these packets: a static
  widget (local file path), a local CGI script, or a HTTP server

- ``PROCESS``: enable the BENG processor

- ``UNTRUSTED``: sets the externally visible host name for requests
  which are proxied to this widget. This marks the widget as “untrusted”
  and disallows any other way of embedding it. This is useful for widget
  code whose JavaScript must not be executed in the same context as
  another widget.

- ``UNTRUSTED_PREFIX``: same as ``UNTRUSTED``, but is a prefix for the
  request host name. This widget can only be used when the request’s
  ``UNTRUSTED`` packet begins with this prefix. Example:
  ``UNTRUSTED_PREFIX="foo"`` matches a request with
  ``UNTRUSTED="foo.example.com"``, but not
  ``UNTRUSTED="foobar.example.com"``.

- ``UNTRUSTED_SITE_SUFFIX``: similar to ``UNTRUSTED_PREFIX``, but
  matches the suffix instead of the prefix. When generating untrusted
  URIs, the site name is prepended. During verification, the request’s
  ``UNTRUSTED`` value must exactly match this scheme.

- ``UNTRUSTED_RAW_SITE_SUFFIX``: Like ``UNTRUSTED_SITE_SUFFIX``, but do
  not insert a dot.

- ``DIRECT_ADDRESSING``: Enable “direct” URI addressing for this
  widget. It is used when the widget is requested in a “frame”. It is a
  simpler scheme that is more natural; relative links can be built
  without URI rewriting and without the special :program:`beng-proxy` encoding.
  In some cases, the processor can therefore be disabled, reducing
  overhead.

- ``STATEFUL``: Remember the state of this widget, i.e. path info and
  query string. It is remembered for ``GET`` requests to the widget
  when it is focused and the XML processor is enabled. ``POST``
  requests do not update the state because the ``POST`` URI may not be
  valid in a follow-up ``GET`` request. AJAX requests on the other
  hand should not update the state, and they do not because they
  usually do not use the XML processor, which is only useful for
  generating the initial HTML page, and not for incremental (AJAX)
  updates.

- ``WIDGET_INFO``: Send the request headers ``X-CM4all-Widget-Id``,
  ``X-CM4all-Widget-Type`` and ``X-CM4all-Widget-Prefix`` to the widget
  server. (Since version 1.3.2)

.. _local_uri:
  
- ``LOCAL_URI``: The URI of the "local" location of a widget
  class. This may refer to a location that serves static resources. It
  is used by the processor for rewriting URIs beginning with ``@/``
  (see :ref:`uriat`). The payload must end with a
  slash. :program:`beng-proxy` does not process this URI. It is going
  to be evaluated by the browser, and may be absolute. For example, it
  may refer to a dedicated resource server.

- ``DUMP_HEADERS``: Enable header dumps for the widget: on a HTTP
  request, the request and response headers will be logged. Only for
  debugging purposes.

.. _login:

Login translation
-----------------

To support interactive login, the translation server can implement this
protocol. It translates a user name to information on how to launch the
user’s processes.

The request contains the following packets:

- ``LOGIN``: Marks this request as a “login” request. No payload.

- ``SERVICE``: Payload specifies the service that wants to log in, e.g.
  "``ssh``" or "``ftp``".

- ``LISTENER_TAG``: A string which specifies the listener this login
  was accepted on; this is optional and its configuration is specific to
  the translation client.

- ``USER``: Contains the user name specified by the client.

- ``PASSWORD``: If this packet is present, then the client asks to
  verify a password (clear-text in the payload). A password mismatch
  must result in a negative reply.

If the user does not exist, the translation server shall respond with
``STATUS=404``.

A successful response must contain at least ``HOME`` and ``UID_GID``:

- ``HOME``: Path of the user’s home directory.

- ``SHELL``: An absolute path specifying the user’s shell.

- ``UID_GID``: Specify uid and gid (and supplementary groups) for the
  child process. Payload is an array of 32 bit integers.

- ``TOKEN``: A token to be matched by the OpenSSH configuration file.

.. _cron:

Cron translation
----------------

This sub-protocol can tell the ``cron`` job execution layer of
*Workshop* how to spawn a child process.

The request contains the following packets:

- ``CRON``: Marks this request as a “cron” request. The payload is the
  name of the ``cron`` section in Workshop’s configuration file, or none
  if none was specified there.

- ``URI``: If the job refers to a URN instead of a command, then this
  packet is present and contains the URN. A successful response must
  specify the program to be executed in ``EXECUTE`` with command-line
  arguments in ``APPEND`` packets.

- ``USER``: The account id owning the job.

- ``PARAM``: An opaque string from the cron job table. Its contents are
  specific to the translation server. Its contents should be considered
  user input, and should not be trusted. Optional.

If the account does not exist, the translation server shall respond with
``STATUS=404``.

If no ``STATUS`` packet is present, the request is assumed to be
successful.

A successful response must contain at least ``HOME`` and ``UID_GID``:

- ``HOME``: Path of the user’s home directory.

- ``UID_GID``: Specify uid and gid (and supplementary groups) for the
  child process. Payload is an array of 32 bit integers.

Additional packets may configure resource limits (:ref:`rlimits`,
:ref:`ns`) and so on (:ref:`childoptions`).

The client may assume that all responses may be cached indefinitely.

.. _pooltrans:

Pool translation
----------------

This sub-protocol is used :program:`beng-lb`. It allows the translation server to
choose a pool which shall handle a specific HTTP request.

The request contains the following packets:

- ``POOL``: Marks this request as a “pool request. The payload is the
  name of the ``translation_handler`` section in ``lb.conf``.

- ``HOST``: the ``Host`` HTTP request header

The response contains the following packets:

- ``POOL``: The name of the pool (or ``branch`` or ``lua_handler`` ...)
  which shall handle the HTTP request.

- ``CANONICAL_HOST``: A string which shall be used instead of the
  ``Host`` request header for the “host” sticky mode.

- ``SITE``: Optional identification or name of the site this resource
  belongs to. It has no meaning for :program:`beng-lb`, and is only used for
  ``TCACHE_INVALIDATE``.

- ``STATUS``: Can be used instead of ``POOL`` to generate a brief error
  response.

- ``REDIRECT``: Can be used instead of ``POOL`` to generate a redirect
  response (``303 See Other`` with the specified ``Location`` header
  value). Can be combined with ``STATUS`` to select a different status
  code.

- ``HTTPS_ONLY``: See page .

- ``MESSAGE``: Can be used instead of ``POOL`` to generate a
  ``text/plain`` response. Can be combined with ``STATUS`` and
  ``REDIRECT``.

- ``VARY``: See page .

The client may assume that all responses may be cached indefinitely.
